Product SiteDocumentation Site

mini-SET 10.1



DEC Guide
=========


A guide to the upcoming mini-SET for DECs and ECs
-------------------------------------------------


[IMAGE]


Michigan Section

Amateur Radio Relay League



Legal Notice
============

CopyrightÂ© 2010, the Michigan Section of the American Radio Relay League
The text of and illustrations in this document are licensed by the
Michigan Section of the American Radio Relay League under a Creative
Commons Attribution--Share Alike 3.0 Unported license ("CC-BY-SA"). An
explanation of CC-BY-SA is available at
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/. The original authors of
this document designate the Michigan Section of the American Radio Relay
League as the "Attribution Party" for purposes of CC-BY-SA. In accordance
with CC-BY-SA, if you distribute this document or an adaptation of it,
you must provide the URL for the original version. The Michigan Section,
as the licensor of this document, waives the right to enforce, and agrees
not to assert, Section 4d of CC-BY-SA to the fullest extent permitted by
applicable law. The ARRL Diamond and logo, the ARES logo and the ARPSC
logo are registered trademarks of the American Radio Relay League in the
United States and other countries. All other trademarks are the property
of their respective owners.

Abstract

The Michigan Section plans to have a number of exercises each year. This
guide is intended to provide planning guidance for DECs and ECs preparing
for the first of those exercises in 2010.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. Overview

      1.1. Introduction

      1.2. Driving Forces

      1.3. Targets for the exercise

      1.4. Capabilities to be developed

2. Exercise Objectives

      2.1. Introduction

      2.2. Structured Communications

      2.3. District Communications Plan

      2.4. NTS Familiarity

3. District Communications Plan

      3.1. Introduction

      3.2. Call Trees

      3.3. Pagers

      3.4. Email Notification

      3.5. Text Messaging

      3.6. Repeater Systems

      3.7. Simplex Systems

4. NTS

      4.1. Introduction

      4.2. Why should ARES use NTS

      4.3. The structure of NTS

      4.4. Michigan NTS Nets

5. Traffic Flow

      5.1. Introduction

      5.2. Traffic Flow

      5.3. Net Schedule

6. NTS Net Interfaces

      6.1. Introduction

      6.2. District Interfaces

      6.3. Scheduled Nets

      6.4. VHF Net Interfaces

      6.5. Contact List

7. Other SEOC Communications

      7.1. Introduction

      7.2. HF Phone

      7.3. HF CW

      7.4. HF Digital

      7.5. VHF/UHF Phone

      7.6. VHF Packet

A. Revision History

Index


1.Â Overview
------------


1.1.Â Introduction

Over the past several EC meetings, ECs have asked for more exercises.
This year the section hopes to have at least three, including the annual
SET. The first of these is planned for April.


1.2.Â Driving Forces

The 2009 SET exposed several serious shortcomings in our level of
readiness. The target of this exercise will be to help develop
capabilities to fill those shortcomings.

  *  Lack of within-District communications plan

  *  Lack of understanding of/interface to NTS

  *  Overall lack of planning


1.3.Â Targets for the exercise

To address these needs, we hope to accomplish one basic target;
communications from and to the State Emergency Operations Center using
formalized, predefined circuits. Communications for the exercise will be
accomplished using point-to-point phone circuits, both VHF and HF. CW and
packet circuits will be available for those counties who wish to test
direct communications to the SEOC, but the primary exercise objectives
will be carried out over phone circuits.


1.4.Â Capabilities to be developed

Each District will need to develop some specific capabilities prior to
the exercise:

  *  A plan for communication among the individual counties in the
    District. This should include not only agreed upon frequencies and
    modes, but also protocols and possible meeting or listening
    schedules.

  *  An understanding of the National Traffic System as it exists in
    Michigan, including liaison with, and familiarity with, local VHF
    traffic nets.

  *  A good understanding of net and traffic handling procedures and
    discipline.


2.Â Exercise Objectives
-----------------------


2.1.Â Introduction

The point of any exercise should be to accomplish something. This section
outlines some of the key objectives for the current exercise.


2.2.Â Structured Communications

The October 2009 SET had intended to demonstrate a structure flow of
messages between the counties and the State EOC, along existing chain of
command lines. (If you will recall, an earlier exercise along an
incident-specific structure elicited some significant complaints.) The
results were not encouraging. Only one of the section nets organized as
expected, and few counties or Districts attempted to exploit the NTS
structure. The exercise structure did leave the Districts a lot of
opportunity to apply their own creativity, but apparently the intent was
insufficiently clear. For this exercise, net schedules and message paths
will be detailed ahead of time. Each section net has a schedule and
specified liaisons. Each District has specified liaisons. There will
still need to be some thought applied to the interface between the
District and the appropriate VHF net, but both responsible parties are
known well ahead of time.


2.3.Â District Communications Plan

During the 2009 SET it also became evident that not all Districts have
thoroughly thought through within-District communications paths. This
issue is discussed in more detail in a later section.


2.4.Â NTS Familiarity

Although most communications in any incident is local, and most of that
is tactical, strategic communications, whether local or otherwise,
requires a higher level of discipline. NTS procedures and structures
provide that discipline within amateur radio. Each program requires at
least a few people that are familiar with the existing NTS network and
how it works. There is a summary later in this document. All individuals
operating in ARES/RACES should have at least some familiarity with NTS
procedures. There is significant NTS training happening around the
Section so at least a few individuals capable of passing NTS formatted
messages should already be available within each program.


3.Â District Communications Plan
--------------------------------


3.1.Â Introduction

One obvious failure that was exposed is the lack of adequate plans for
communications among the counties in a District. Certainly there has been
discussion, and also discussion about communications between Districts.
But before we develop between District plans, we need to have the problem
solved within a District.


3.2.Â Call Trees

Many counties, and even a few Districts, have call trees established,
although these are rarely up to date. Certainly, we should use every
technology at our disposal, and the telephone is a common, and reliable
mode. However, this mode will not work if the numbers are out of date, if
we only have home numbers and people are away from their phones, or, of
course, if the phones are out. These systems need to be tested
frequently, but backup mechanisms must also be in place.


3.3.Â Pagers

Many programs have pagers, either provided by their counties, or
developed by the programs themselves. Pagers tend to be more reliable
than cellular systems, but few, if any, Districts have paging systems for
all the counties in the District.


3.4.Â Email Notification

Most, if not all, Districts have email lists for notifying the various
ECs of an event. However, email is not real time, and most ECs do not
have mobile email devices, so email is not appropriate for notfication of
an incident. In addition, many types of incidents can impact local
Internet connections (although widespread Internet outages are virtually
unheard of).


3.5.Â Text Messaging

In cases where all ECs have cellular telephones, notifications based on
text messaging can be effective. However, keep in mind that in the event
of an actual incident, or even a high profile exercise, cellular systems
will fail almost immediately, so this method is of limited use in the
event of an actual incident.


3.6.Â Repeater Systems

Many programs have some sort of scheme for notification by repeater, and
in most cases, the various counties in a District are at least aware of
the frequencies of repeaters in adjacent counties, so when the repeater
infrastructure is unaffected, repeaters are of course useful tools.
However, repeaters often have their vulnerabilities. Often, they are
higher profile than home stations, so are more likely to be affected by
some kinds of weather events. Repeaters are often isolated, and may not
be in hardened sites, so can be affected by vandalism and other human
caused incidents. Repeaters often have some backup power, but frequently
that backup power is limited.


3.7.Â Simplex Systems

Most programs do not have reliable simplex systems thought out, but
certainly, they offer the potential for greater robustness than most
other systems. To be effective, however, all parties need to know what is
expected. Some things to consider:

  *  There must be a prearranged and well communicated plan for
    frequencies to be used

  *  There must be a prearranged schedule

  *  Each key station should be able to operate for an extended period of
    time removed from commercial mains

  *  Each key station should have a backup plan in the event of antenna
    damage or equipment malfunction


The plan must be communicated
-----------------------------

No plan can be effective unless all affected parties are well aware of
the content of the plan and are capable of implementing it


4.Â NTS
-------


4.1.Â Introduction

Messages are carried across North America, and across the Section, by the
National Traffic System. NTS operators practice constantly and as a
result, are highly skilled at transmitting messges.


Practice makes perfect
----------------------

In contrast to ARES operators who exercise only occasionally, many NTS
operators practice their skill every day. Of course, it is "common
knowledge" that "NTS is dying", but here in the Michigan Section, at
least, NTS traffic has increased every year since at least 2005 (the
earliest year for which the section has data).


4.2.Â Why should ARES use NTS

Since NTS operators have the skill, it only makes sense to use the best
possible service. Obviously, NTS has little to offer for the local,
tactical communications that make up perhaps 99% of the communications
needed for any incident. But when traffic needs to leave the county, then
it only makes good sense to rely on those who do it every day. This also
keeps resources free for urgent local needs.


4.3.Â The structure of NTS

NTS is structured into a series of layered nets. Each level sends a
representative to the higher level. Net schedules are arranged to
facilitate the rapid distribution of traffic across the system. The five
layers of NTS nets are:

  *  Local nets

  *  Section nets

  *  Region nets

  *  Area nets

  *  The Transcontinental Corps

Local nets send a representative to the Section nets. A Michigan
representative to the Eighth Region net (8RN) is designated for each
meeting of 8RN to carry traffic from the Section nets to the Eighth
Region. 8RN in turn sends a representative to the Eastern Area net (EAN).
Transcontinental Corps (TCC) members then carry traffic between the
areas, where it is then distributed downwards through the same structure
until it can be delivered.


4.4.Â Michigan NTS Nets

Michigan has four affiliated VHF nets and seven HF nets. These nets,
their net managers, frequencies and schedules are available at
http://www.mi-nts.org/netinfo.php. The VHF nets tend to be oriented
toward training, although they handle substantial amounts of traffic.
Some of the HF nets, notably QMN and MITN, are somewhat "hard core",
focusing solely on traffic and generally having very short sessions. The
others are more general nets where traffic is passed but that is not the
sole purpose of the net. Although there are significant month to month
variations, Michigan nets report handling between 600 and 1000 messages
each month, with approximately two-thirds of that handled by QMN, MITN
and MVTN.


5.Â Traffic Flow
----------------


5.1.Â Introduction

In order to engage all the affiliated nets, and to also encourage the
DECs to develop relationships with their local VHF net, traffic will be
routed through all the nets. At the beginning of the exercise, the SEOC
will transmit queries to each District through HF nets. These messages
will flow through NTS to each District. The nature of the query will
require that the District query each of it's counties. The result will
then be pushed back through NTS ultimately arrivng at the SEOC via an HF
net.


5.2.Â Traffic Flow

Four HF nets will meet in sequence receiving traffic from the SEOC. Each
of these nets will include representatives from a VHF net. These reps
will then take the traffic to the VHF net for delivery to the District.
After composing a response, the District will deliver it's answer to that
same VHF net, who in turn will send a representative to one of two HF
nets meeting with the SEOC later in the morning. Traffic Flow Diagram
Traffic Flow

FigureÂ 1.Â Traffic Flow Diagram


5.3.Â Net Schedule

Each HF net has a specific time slot with the SEOC. It is presumed that
the VHF net will meet following the HF meeting at the beginning of the
exercise, and before the HF net at the end of the exercise. Net Schedule
Net Schedule

FigureÂ 2.Â Net Schedule


6.Â NTS Net Interfaces
----------------------


6.1.Â Introduction

At each level, representatives will need to interface with other nets or
Districts. Interfaces between HF and VHF nets are common, and in many
cases, well established. However, DECs will need to identify the
appropriate nets and make plans to receive traffic from the net and
return a response later.


Planning is required
--------------------

DECs should arrange well in advance for interfaces with the appropriate
VHF net. DECs will also need to know how they will get a response from
each county.


6.2.Â District Interfaces

Each District will interface with one VHF net. There will be an inbound
and an outbound "session". However, this will not be a traditional net
session. Since this is a simplex exercise, and the VHF nets typically
meet on a repeater or linked system, the Net Manager and DEC will need to
establish a simplex path or relay from the net to the District.

District

Contact Net

Inbound Time

Outbound Time

1

SEMTN

0900

1130

2

SEMTN

0900

1130

3

TMMTN

0930

1130

5

MVTN

0830

1100

6

MVTN

0830

1100

7

MVTN

0830

1100

8

NLEUP

1000

1130

APX

MVTN

0830

1100

DTX

SEMTN

0900

1130

GRR

MVTN

0830

1100

MQT

NLEUP

1000

1130

TableÂ 1.Â District Interfaces


Net Managers Note
-----------------

Since we will not be using repeaters, you will need to establish a relay
between your net and the appropriate District(s). Each DEC will need to
work with the appropriate net manager well ahead of time to determine
stations and schedules that will allow the traffic picked up by the net
to be delivered to the District, and allow responses from the District to
be routed back through the net.


6.3.Â Scheduled Nets

Since the SEOC must meet with seven HF nets over the course of the
morning, the HF nets require a prearranged schedule. VHF net meetings may
vary, but they will need to be close to the times below, given their
interfaces with the HF nets.

Time

Net

0800

MITN picks up traffic from SEOC sends reps to MVTN

0830

MACS picks up traffic from SEOC sends reps to SEMTN

0830

MVTN delivers traffic to D5, 6, 7

0900

Wolverine picks up traffic from SEOC sends reps to TMMTN

0900

SEMTN delivers traffic to D1, 2

0930

UP Net picks up traffic from SEOC sends reps to NLEUP

0930

TMMTN delivers traffic to D3

1000

NLEUP delivers traffic to D8

1100

MVTN picks up traffic from D5, 6, 7, sends reps to GLETN

1130

GLETN meets delivers traffic to SEOC

1130

SEMTN picks up traffic from D1, 2 sends reps to QMN

1130

TMMTN picks up traffic from D3 sends reps to QMN

1130

NLEUP picks up traffic from D8 sends reps to QMN

1200

QMN meets delivers traffic to SEOC

TableÂ 2.Â District Interfaces


6.4.Â VHF Net Interfaces

VHF Net Managers willl need to arrange liaisons with two HF nets, one for
traffic flowing into the net and one for traffic leaving the net.

VHF Net

Inbound Net

Outbound Net

MVTN

MITN

GLETN

NLEUP

UP

QMN

SEMTN

MACS

QMN

TMMTN

Wolverine

QMN

TableÂ 3.Â VHF Net Interfaces


6.5.Â Contact List

The following contacts must be made during March to arrange liaisons, VHF
relays, etc:

Davis, Ted N8ZSA

  *  WB8WKQ

Duggan, Red WA8RLI

  *  AC8AR

Fleming, John K8UP

  *  WB8WKQ

Flickinger, Carl KB8FQJ

  *  AC8AR

Gage, Michael N8VLN

  *  AC8AR

Gagnon, Aileen WA8DHB

  *  KG8NK

Gebolis, Lou KG8NK

  *  WA8DHB

  *  K8AE

  *  KI8AF

Hanson, Greg KI8AF

  *  KG8NK

Miller, Jeff WB8WKQ

  *  AC8AR

  *  WB9JSR

  *  K8AE

  *  N8ZSA

  *  K8YZA

  *  K8UP

Pullen, Joseph K8YZA

  *  WB8WKQ

Stinson, Chris KC8YTK

  *  AC8AR

Travis, Anne K8AE

  *  KG8NK

  *  K8MFK

  *  WB8WKQ

Tuscher, Joe N8OSL

  *  K8MFK

van der Mel, Tom KB8VEE

  *  AC8AR

Warczynski, Ron K9RON

  *  K8MFK

Warsalla, Frank K8MFK

  *  K9RON

  *  N8OSL

  *  K8AE

Wehmer, John WB9JSR

  *  WB8WKQ

Wiswasser, Jack WA8IAL

  *  AC8AR

Young, Jean AC8AR

  *  WB8WKQ

  *  KB8FQJ

  *  KB8VEE

  *  WA8RLI

  *  N8VLN

  *  KC8YTK

  *  WA8IAL

TableÂ 4.Â Contact Pairs


7.Â Other SEOC Communications
-----------------------------


7.1.Â Introduction

During any statewide exercise, each program often wants to test circuits
from their local EOC to the State EOC. Limited opportunities will be
available during this exercise.


7.2.Â HF Phone

Because we wish to engage all the HF nets, the HF phone capability of the
SEOC will be exhausted during this exercise. Direct contact over HF phone
from the individual counties is unwelcome for this exercise.


7.3.Â HF CW

To accomodate direct communications with individual counties, the SEOC
will monitor 3.563 MHz CW from 9:00 AM to 11:00 AM during the exercise.


7.4.Â HF Digital

The SEOC will not be using HF digital modes during the exercise.


7.5.Â VHF/UHF Phone

This is a simplex exercise. As such, VHF phone connections will not be
appropriate from most programs. To accomodate nearby programs or VHF/UHF
relays, the SEOC will monitor 147.54 MHz and 446.00 MHz from 10:00 AM to
11:00 AM.


7.6.Â VHF Packet

The SEOC will be available to receive formal traffic on
seoc@seoc.ampr.org . Replies may or may not be timely. The station will
also monitor CONV channel 911.


A.Â Revision History
--------------------

Revision History

Revision 3

Tue Feb 23 2010

John McDonough

Use tables instead of segmentedlist to make pdf work better

Revision 2

Mon Feb 22 2010

John McDonough

Add Objectives

Add Other

Rearrange sections

Revision 1

Wed Feb 10 2010

John McDonough

Additional content

Test admonitions

Revision 0

Tue Feb 9 2010

John McDonough

Initial creation of book by publican


Index
-----


A

Area Nets, The structure of NTS


C

Call Tree, Call Trees

Communications Plan, District Communications Plan, Introduction

Communications Plans, Driving Forces, Capabilities to be developed

Communications Structure, Structured Communications

Contacts, Contact List


D

DEC   

      Planning, Introduction, District Interfaces

DECs, Contact List


E

Eastern Area Net, The structure of NTS

Eighth Region Net, The structure of NTS

Email Notification, Email Notification

Exercise Targets, Targets for the exercise


M

Michigan Nets, Michigan NTS Nets


N

National Traffic System, Driving Forces, Capabilities to be developed,
Introduction

      Familiarity with, NTS Familiarity

      Structure of, The structure of NTS

Net Discipline, Capabilities to be developed

Net Interfaces, VHF Net Interfaces

Net Manager

      Planning, Introduction, District Interfaces

Net Managers, Contact List

Net Schedule, Structured Communications, Scheduled Nets

Nets  

      Area, The structure of NTS

      ARES Interface with, District Interfaces

      Interface with other nets, VHF Net Interfaces

      Michigan, Michigan NTS Nets

      Region, The structure of NTS

      Section, The structure of NTS

      Timeline, Scheduled Nets


O

Objectives

      Communications Plan, District Communications Plan

      NTS Familiarity, NTS Familiarity

      Structured Communications, Structured Communications


P

pagers, Pagers

Planning, Driving Forces

      DECs, Introduction, District Interfaces

      Need for, Introduction

      Net Managers, Introduction, District Interfaces


R

Region Nets, The structure of NTS

Repeater Systems, Repeater Systems


S

Section Nets, The structure of NTS

Simplex, Targets for the exercise

Simplex Systems, Simplex Systems


T

Text Messaging, Text Messaging

Traffic Handling, Capabilities to be developed, Introduction

Transcontinental Corps, The structure of NTS
