Product SiteDocumentation Site

mini-SET 10.1



Net Manager Guide
=================


A guide to the upcoming mini-SET for Net Managers
-------------------------------------------------


[IMAGE]


Michigan Section

Amateur Radio Relay League



Legal Notice
============

CopyrightÂ© 2010, the Michigan Section of the American Radio Relay League
The text of and illustrations in this document are licensed by the
Michigan Section of the American Radio Relay League under a Creative
Commons Attribution--Share Alike 3.0 Unported license ("CC-BY-SA"). An
explanation of CC-BY-SA is available at
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/. The original authors of
this document designate the Michigan Section of the American Radio Relay
League as the "Attribution Party" for purposes of CC-BY-SA. In accordance
with CC-BY-SA, if you distribute this document or an adaptation of it,
you must provide the URL for the original version. The Michigan Section,
as the licensor of this document, waives the right to enforce, and agrees
not to assert, Section 4d of CC-BY-SA to the fullest extent permitted by
applicable law. The ARRL Diamond and logo, the ARES logo and the ARPSC
logo are registered trademarks of the American Radio Relay League in the
United States and other countries. All other trademarks are the property
of their respective owners.

Abstract

The Michigan Section plans to have a number of exercises each year. This
guide is intended to provide planning guidance for Net Managers preparing
for the first of those exercises in 2010.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. Overview

      1.1. Introduction

      1.2. Driving Forces

      1.3. Targets for the exercise

      1.4. Capabilities to be developed

2. Exercise Objectives

      2.1. Introduction

      2.2. Structured Communications

      2.3. Net Response Plan

      2.4. ARES Familiarity

3. ARES

      3.1. Introduction

      3.2. ARES Structure

4. Traffic Flow

      4.1. Introduction

      4.2. Traffic Flow

      4.3. Net Schedule

5. NTS Net Interfaces

      5.1. Introduction

      5.2. District Interfaces

      5.3. Scheduled Nets

      5.4. VHF Net Interfaces

      5.5. Contact List

6. Other SEOC Communications

      6.1. Introduction

      6.2. HF Phone

      6.3. HF CW

      6.4. HF Digital

      6.5. VHF/UHF Phone

      6.6. VHF Packet

A. Revision History

Index


1.Â Overview
------------


1.1.Â Introduction

Over the past several years, many people have asked for more exercises.
This year the section hopes to have at least three, including the annual
SET. The first of these is planned for April.


1.2.Â Driving Forces

The 2009 SET exposed several serious shortcomings in our level of
readiness. The target of this exercise will be to help develop
capabilities to fill those shortcomings.

  *  Lack of leadership within nets

  *  Lack of understanding of/interface to ARES

  *  Overall lack of planning


1.3.Â Targets for the exercise

To address these needs, we hope to accomplish one basic target;
communications from and to the State Emergency Operations Center using
formalized, predefined circuits. Communications for the exercise will be
accomplished using point-to-point phone circuits, both VHF and HF. CW and
packet circuits will be available for those counties who wish to test
direct communications to the SEOC, but the primary exercise objectives
will be carried out over phone circuits.


1.4.Â Capabilities to be developed

Each net will need to develop some specific capabilities prior to the
exercise:

  *  A plan for action in response to emergency or unusual needs among
    the various affiliated nets.

  *  An understanding by the Section National Traffic System leadership
    of the Amateur Radio Emergency Services and its possible needs in the
    event of an incident.

  *  A familiarity by NTS members of the individuals in leadership
    positions within ARES and their capabilities and assets.


2.Â Exercise Objectives
-----------------------


2.1.Â Introduction

The point of any exercise should be to accomplish something. This section
outlines some of the key objectives for the current exercise.


2.2.Â Structured Communications

The October 2009 SET had intended to demonstrate a structured flow of
messages between the counties and the State EOC, along existing chain of
command lines. (If you will recall, an earlier exercise along an
incident-specific structure elicited some significant complaints.) The
results were not encouraging. Only one of the section nets organized as
expected, and few counties or Districts attempted to exploit the NTS
structure. The exercise structure did leave the nets a lot of opportunity
to apply their own creativity, but apparently the intent was
insufficiently clear. For this exercise, net schedules and message paths
will be detailed ahead of time. Each section net has a schedule and
specified liaisons. Each District has specified liaisons. There will
still need to be some thought applied to the interface between the
District and the appropriate VHF net, but both responsible parties are
known well ahead of time.


2.3.Â Net Response Plan

Over recent years, it appears that nets have lost the ability or
incentive to be able to mobilize in response to an incident. Nets are
accustomed to meeting at a specific time and frequency and somehow are
not prepared to change. However, when an incident occurs, the National
Traffic System is a vital part of the overall response. ARES units are
structured to respond locally, and their communications capability is
largely local. They require the services of NTS for longer haul
communications, as well as to provide structure in the event of a heavy
communications load. This exercise will only take a small step in the
direction of giving the nets the skills needed. There will be more
interfaces with the ARES organization, and an opportunity will be given
for close leadership cooperation between ARES and NTS.


2.4.Â ARES Familiarity

Most net managers have little opportunity in ordinary circumstances to
interface with ARES organizations. However, familiarity with the
individuals involved and their capabilities is vital if NTS is to offer
needed services in the event of an incident. This exercise will give NTS
leaders some exposure to ARES leaders. Especially in the case of the VHF
nets, they will need to work closely to be successful. This, of course,
is not sufficient, but it is a start. Net managers should begin thinking
about issues such as:

  *  What might my net be called on to do in the event of some kind of
    incident or emergency

  *  How will I notify my members in the event of an unexpected net
    activation

  *  If I need to activate at a different time of day, will I know how to
    respond to different band conditions

  *  Do I know which net members might be available if we have a net
    meeting at a time different than normal

  *  For VHF nets, do I have a plan to respond in the event my repeater
    is out of service

These are only a few of the questions net managers should begin thinking
about. This exercise will not answer these questions, but we hope to
begin providing the insight necessary for the nets to begin grappling
with them.


3.Â ARES
--------


3.1.Â Introduction

ARES is the "feet on the ground" side of ARPSC. NTS is the behind the
scenes engine that moves messages. Because it is largely involved in
local response, ARES is not often visible to NTS operators. However, in
the Michigan Section we have approxmately 2,000 ARES members. It is a
large, highly structured organization which works closely with the
Michigan State Police, local emergency management, and many other public
service and public safety organizations.


3.2.Â ARES Structure

ARES is organized along the State Police Districts. There are 11 District
Emergency Coordinators reporting to the Section Emergency Coordinator.
These DECs represent the seven State Police Districts and the four
National Weather Service offices in Michigan. Each of Michigan's 83
counties has an Emergency Coordinator who reports to the respective
District Emergency Coordinator. These ECs and DECs often have assistants
with specific responsibilities. SKYWARN is often closely associated with
ARES, and many Assistant Emergency Coordinators serve as their county's
SKYWARN coordinator. Each county has a local organization whose size and
responsibilities vary widely depending on the size and needs of the
county. In some rural counties the organization may consist of only two
or three members, while a larger county may boast hundreds of members. At
each level, ARES officials are aligned with government officials, and
often work closely with them. The SEC works closely with the State Police
Logistics Section Chief, the DECs work with MSP's District Coordinators,
and the county ECs align with their individual county Emergency Manager.
Whenever possible, the appointments are made jointly between the Section
Manager and the appropriate government official. DECs serving NWS offices
are aligned with that office's Warning Coordination Meterologist.


4.Â Traffic Flow
----------------


4.1.Â Introduction

In order to engage all the affiliated nets, and to also encourage the
DECs to develop relationships with their local VHF net, traffic will be
routed through all the nets. At the beginning of the exercise, the SEOC
will transmit queries to each District through HF nets. These messages
will flow through NTS to each District. The nature of the query will
require that the District query each of it's counties. The result will
then be pushed back through NTS ultimately arrivng at the SEOC via an HF
net.


4.2.Â Traffic Flow

Four HF nets will meet in sequence receiving traffic from the SEOC. Each
of these nets will include representatives from a VHF net. These reps
will then take the traffic to the VHF net for delivery to the District.
After composing a response, the District will deliver it's answer to that
same VHF net, who in turn will send a representative to one of two HF
nets meeting with the SEOC later in the morning. Traffic Flow Diagram
Traffic Flow

FigureÂ 1.Â Traffic Flow Diagram


4.3.Â Net Schedule

Each HF net has a specific time slot with the SEOC. It is presumed that
the VHF net will meet following the HF meeting at the beginning of the
exercise, and before the HF net at the end of the exercise. Net Schedule
Net Schedule

FigureÂ 2.Â Net Schedule


5.Â NTS Net Interfaces
----------------------


5.1.Â Introduction

At each level, representatives will need to interface with other nets or
Districts. Interfaces between HF and VHF nets are common, and in many
cases, well established. However, DECs will need to identify the
appropriate nets and make plans to receive traffic from the net and
return a response later.


Planning is required - VHF Net managers should arrange well in advance
for interfaces with the appropriate DEC.
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Â 


5.2.Â District Interfaces

Each District will interface with one VHF net. There will be an inbound
and an outbound "session". However, this will not be a traditional net
session. Since this is a simplex exercise, and the VHF nets typically
meet on a repeater or linked system, the Net Manager and DEC will need to
establish a simplex path or relay from the net to the District.

District

Contact Net

Inbound Time

Outbound Time

1

SEMTN

0900

1130

2

SEMTN

0900

1130

3

TMMTN

0930

1130

5

MVTN

0830

1100

6

MVTN

0830

1100

7

MVTN

0830

1100

8

NLEUP

1000

1130

APX

MVTN

0830

1100

DTX

SEMTN

0900

1130

GRR

MVTN

0830

1100

MQT

NLEUP

1000

1130

TableÂ 1.Â District Interfaces


VHF Net Managers Note: Since we will not be using repeaters, you will
need to establish a relay between your net and the appropriate
District(s).
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Â  Each DEC will need to work with the appropriate net manager well ahead
of time to determine stations and schedules that will allow the traffic
picked up by the net to be delivered to the District, and allow responses
from the District to be routed back through the net. This is especially
challenging for the VHF nets. Each VHF net will need to arrange contacts
with multiple DECs. In addition to messages to each of the seven MSP
Districts, there will also be traffic for the various NWS offices. While
each DEC only has one net to be concerned with, the VHF nets have between
one and seven DECs to interface with. Since some of the VHF nets cover a
substantial area, and this is to be a simplex exercise, it may take a
large number of relays to deliver the traffic. The DECs have at their
disposal a large number of operators who may be able to assist, but by
and large these operators have no traffic experience. Each of the net
managers will need to provide substantial guidance and mentoring to these
inexperienced operators.


5.3.Â Scheduled Nets

Since the SEOC must meet with seven HF nets over the course of the
morning, the HF nets require a prearranged schedule. VHF net meetings may
vary, but they will need to be close to the times below, given their
interfaces with the HF nets.

Time

Net

0800

MITN picks up traffic from SEOC sends reps to MVTN

0830

MACS picks up traffic from SEOC sends reps to SEMTN

0830

MVTN delivers traffic to D5, 6, 7

0900

Wolverine picks up traffic from SEOC sends reps to TMMTN

0900

SEMTN delivers traffic to D1, 2

0930

UP Net picks up traffic from SEOC sends reps to NLEUP

0930

TMMTN delivers traffic to D3

1000

NLEUP delivers traffic to D8

1100

MVTN picks up traffic from D5, 6, 7, sends reps to GLETN

1130

GLETN meets delivers traffic to SEOC

1130

SEMTN picks up traffic from D1, 2 sends reps to QMN

1130

TMMTN picks up traffic from D3 sends reps to QMN

1130

NLEUP picks up traffic from D8 sends reps to QMN

1200

QMN meets delivers traffic to SEOC

TableÂ 2.Â District Interfaces


5.4.Â VHF Net Interfaces

VHF Net Managers willl need to arrange liaisons with two HF nets, one for
traffic flowing into the net and one for traffic leaving the net.

VHF Net

Inbound Net

Outbound Net

MVTN

MITN

GLETN

NLEUP

UP

QMN

SEMTN

MACS

QMN

TMMTN

Wolverine

QMN

TableÂ 3.Â VHF Net Interfaces


5.5.Â Contact List

The following contacts must be made during March to arrange liaisons, VHF
relays, etc:

Davis, Ted N8ZSA

  *  WB8WKQ

Duggan, Red WA8RLI

  *  AC8AR

Fleming, John K8UP

  *  WB8WKQ

Flickinger, Carl KB8FQJ

  *  AC8AR

Gage, Michael N8VLN

  *  AC8AR

Gagnon, Aileen WA8DHB

  *  KG8NK

Gebolis, Lou KG8NK

  *  WA8DHB

  *  K8AE

  *  KI8AF

Hanson, Greg KI8AF

  *  KG8NK

Miller, Jeff WB8WKQ

  *  AC8AR

  *  WB9JSR

  *  K8AE

  *  N8ZSA

  *  K8YZA

  *  K8UP

Pullen, Joseph K8YZA

  *  WB8WKQ

Stinson, Chris KC8YTK

  *  AC8AR

Travis, Anne K8AE

  *  KG8NK

  *  K8MFK

  *  WB8WKQ

Tuscher, Joe N8OSL

  *  K8MFK

van der Mel, Tom KB8VEE

  *  AC8AR

Warczynski, Ron K9RON

  *  K8MFK

Warsalla, Frank K8MFK

  *  K9RON

  *  N8OSL

  *  K8AE

Wehmer, John WB9JSR

  *  WB8WKQ

Wiswasser, Jack WA8IAL

  *  AC8AR

Young, Jean AC8AR

  *  WB8WKQ

  *  KB8FQJ

  *  KB8VEE

  *  WA8RLI

  *  N8VLN

  *  KC8YTK

  *  WA8IAL

TableÂ 4.Â Contact Pairs


6.Â Other SEOC Communications
-----------------------------


6.1.Â Introduction

During any statewide exercise, each program often wants to test circuits
from their local EOC to the State EOC. Limited opportunities will be
available during this exercise.


6.2.Â HF Phone

Because we wish to engage all the HF nets, the HF phone capability of the
SEOC will be exhausted during this exercise. Direct contact over HF phone
from the individual counties is unwelcome for this exercise.


6.3.Â HF CW

To accomodate direct communications with individual counties, the SEOC
will monitor 3.563 MHz CW from 9:00 AM to 11:00 AM during the exercise.


6.4.Â HF Digital

The SEOC will not be using HF digital modes during the exercise.


6.5.Â VHF/UHF Phone

This is a simplex exercise. As such, VHF phone connections will not be
appropriate from most programs. To accomodate nearby programs or VHF/UHF
relays, the SEOC will monitor 147.54 MHz and 446.00 MHz from 10:00 AM to
11:00 AM.


6.6.Â VHF Packet

The SEOC will be available to receive formal traffic on
seoc@seoc.ampr.org . Replies may or may not be timely. The station will
also monitor CONV channel 911.


A.Â Revision History
--------------------

Revision History

Revision 1

Fri Mar 05 2010

John McDonough

Initial revision


Index
-----


A

Amateur Radio Emergency Services, Capabilities to be developed,
Introduction

      Familiarity with, ARES Familiarity

ARES, Driving Forces

ARES Contacts, Capabilities to be developed


C

Communications Structure, Structured Communications

Contacts, Contact List


D

DEC   

      Planning, Introduction, District Interfaces

DECs, Contact List


E

Emergency Plans, Capabilities to be developed

Exercise Targets, Targets for the exercise


N

Net Interfaces, VHF Net Interfaces

Net Leadership, Driving Forces

Net Manager

      Planning, Introduction, District Interfaces

Net Managers, Contact List

Net Schedule, Structured Communications, Scheduled Nets

Nets  

      ARES Interface with, District Interfaces

      Interface with other nets, VHF Net Interfaces

      Timeline, Scheduled Nets


O

Objectives

      ARES Familiarity, ARES Familiarity

      Response Plan, Net Response Plan

      Structured Communications, Structured Communications


P

Planning, Driving Forces

      DECs, Introduction, District Interfaces

      Need for, Introduction

      Net Managers, Introduction, District Interfaces


S

Simplex, Targets for the exercise
