Product SiteDocumentation Site

ARPSC 2010



Michigan 2010 Summary
=====================


An overview of the 2010 program year
------------------------------------


John McDonough, WB8RCR

Michigan Section, Section Emergency Coordinator / Section Traffic Managerwb8rcr@arrl.net



Legal Notice
============

CopyrightÂ© 2011, The Michigan Section of the American Radio Relay League
The text of and illustrations in this document are licensed by the
Michigan Section of the American Radio Relay League under a Creative
Commons Attribution--Share Alike 3.0 Unported license ("CC-BY-SA"). An
explanation of CC-BY-SA is available at
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/. The original authors of
this document designate the Michigan Section of the American Radio Relay
League as the "Attribution Party" for purposes of CC-BY-SA. In accordance
with CC-BY-SA, if you distribute this document or an adaptation of it,
you must provide the URL for the original version. The Michigan Section,
as the licensor of this document, waives the right to enforce, and agrees
not to assert, Section 4d of CC-BY-SA to the fullest extent permitted by
applicable law. The ARRL Diamond and logo, the ARES logo and the ARPSC
logo are registered trademarks of the American Radio Relay League in the
United States and other countries. All other trademarks are the property
of their respective owners.

Abstract

Working with state and local governments, as well as a wide variety of
non-governmental agencies, Michigan amateurs participate in a wide range
of public service and emergency preparedness activities. This report
outlines the efforts of the 2010 calendar year.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. Overview

2. Amateur Radio Emergency Service

      2.1. Organization

3. National Traffic System

      3.1. Organization

4. Individual Amateur Reporting

      4.1. Public Service Honor Roll

      4.2. Station Activity Reports

      4.3. Brass Pounder's League

5. New Media

      5.1. Electronic Mail

      5.2. Web

      5.3. Blogs

      5.4. Online Social Groups

      5.5. Microblogging

      5.6. Online Meetings

      5.7. Wiki

6. Significant Incidents

7. Exercises

      7.1. State-sponsored exercises

      7.2. Section Exercises

      7.3. 2011 Exercise Plans

8. Conferences

9. State Homeland Security Strategy

A. Revision History


1.Â Overview
------------

The Michigan Amateur Radio Public Service Corps (ARPSC) is an
organization of over 2,000 amateur radio operators who participate in
public service and emergency response activities. These include such
things as providing communications for various walks and runs, as well as
reporting storm damage, participating in search and rescue efforts, and
providing backup communications for public safety officers. There are two
primary programs, the Amateur Radio Emergency Services (ARES) and the
National Traffic System (NTS). ARES provides "feet on the ground" for
various events and incidents, while NTS provides a communications
infrastructure that moves formal messages acroos the state and across the
nation. There are two other programs, associated with ARES, which do not
report independently. These are RACES and SKYWARN. RACES consists of
those ARES members who have been approved by their local government to
operate in critical areas such as incident scenes or Emergency Operations
Centers. This approval generally requires a degree of training and a
background check. The Michigan Section and the Michigan State Police have
published suggested RACES qualifications, but the responsibility for
vetting RACES members rests with the local Emergency Management
Coordinator. Most counties follow the guidelines closely. SKYWARN members
provide ground weather observations to their local jurisdictions and to
the National Weather Service. SKYWARN member do not have to be ARES
members, but almost always are, and most counties run SKYWARN programs as
part of their ARES programs. SKYWARN observers are trained by the
National Weather Service. Together, Michigan amateurs reported over
85,000 volunteer hours during 2010 representing a value of over $1.5
million.


2.Â Amateur Radio Emergency Service
-----------------------------------

ARES represents the largest program. ARES has a program in each Michigan
county, managed by an Emergency Coordinator who works closely with the
Emergency Management Director of the county to provide backup
communications to the local jurisdiction. Because Michigan counties are
so varied, the ARES organizations within those counties are quite varied.
Although their primary customer is typically the county Emergency
Management organization, they may also work with the local Red Cross,
Salvation Army, and other NGOs. In some counties, the liaison with the
fire departments or Sheriff's office is especially close. Each county has
different needs, and the ARES organization attempts to meet those needs.
In Michigan, and especially southern Michigan, severe weather is common,
and in many cases, the greatest effort is expended with weather related
activities. Amateurs spot bad weather and report to their National
Weather Service office when bad weather is approaching, and following
severe weather, are often involved in recovery operations. Late spring
and early summer tend to be the time when damaging weather is
encountered, and this is also the time that many organizations hold runs,
walks and other events for which amateurs frequently provide
communications. Hence, the peaks in the middle of the year in the graph
below: Michigan ARES Hours FSD-212 Results

FigureÂ 1.Â Michigan ARES Hours


Michigan ARES programs reported 55,087 hours in 2010, 7035 of them
occuring in June. 2010 was a very light year for damaging weather. In
2009, when the state experienced much severe weather, more than twice
that effort was reported in May alone, with all the late spring/early
summer months exceeding June of 2010.


2.1.Â Organization

The Michigan State Police divides the state into 7 Districts, and
appoints a District Coordinator for each. ARES has a District Emergency
Coordinator for each of those districts, who works with the District
coordinator. In addition, the Section appoints a District Emergency
Coordinator for each of the National Weather Service offices in the
state. This NWS DEC works with the office's Warning Coordination
Meteorologist to provide training to SKYWARN members and implement
circuits that permit field observations to be transmitted to the NWS
office effectively. These DECs are as follows:

District

DEC Call

DEC Name

1

K8YZA

Joe Pullen

2

K8UP

John Fleming

3

N8OSL

Joe Tuscher

5

KB8FQJ

Carl Flickinger

6

KB8VEE

Tom van der Mel

7

WA8RLI

Red Duggan

8

KG8NK

Lou Gembolis

APX

KC8YTK

Chris Stinson

DTX

N8ZSA

Ted Davis

GRR

N8VLN

Michael Gage

MQT

KI8AF

Greg Hanson

TableÂ 1.Â District Emergency Coordinators


In addition, the Section Emergency Coordinator maintains a small staff to
help organize the section. These assistant SECs are:

Role

ASEC Call

ASEC Name

SEOC Alternate

N8ERF

Dr. Dennis Klipa

SEOC Station Manager

K8RDN

Robert Berger

Training and Exercises

NX8A

John (Jack) Hutcheson

TableÂ 2.Â Assistant Section Emergency Coordinators


3.Â National Traffic System
---------------------------

Michigan's National Traffic System consists of amateurs who send messages
(called "traffic") around the Section and around the nation. These
amateurs are organized into a group of on the air nets that meet
frequently with the intent of passing messages. These are the "unsung
heros" of ARPSC; many practice their skill every day, but they operate
behind the scene, out of the eye of the served agencies and the public.
The individual nets report monthly. Michigan nets send approximately 1000
messages a month. In 2010, they reported 13,848 messages passed. Not all
traffic is reported, although the large number of non-reporting nets
probably pass a small fraction of the messages. The chart below shows the
performance across the year: Affiliated Net Reporting NTS Results

FigureÂ 2.Â Affiliated Net Reporting


Detailed reports for the most recent month are available at
http://www.mi-nts.org/netreport.php. Links on the page allow for viewing
of previous reports or individual net history. Michigan amateurs also
participate in other nets. The Eighth Region net takes messages destined
for out of state addresses, and collects traffic bound for Michigan to
pass to Michigan representatives who will then carry those messages to
the Michigan nets. The Eastern Area Net interfaces with the Region nets
to move traffic among the Regions in the Eastern Area. The
Transcontinental Corps arranges to move traffic between the Areas.
Michigan amateurs participate in all of these, however that effort is not
reflected in Michigan reporting.


3.1.Â Organization

The bulk of the traffic is passed through ten affiliated nets. Each net
has an appointed net manager, responsible for arranging net controls and
liaisons to other nets, and for reporting monthly to the Section Traffic
Manager. The affiliated nets and their net managers are:

Net

Call

Net Manager

Great Lakes Emergency and Traffic Net

WA8IAL

Jack Wiswasser

Michigan Amateur Communications System

WB9JSR

John Wehmer

Michigan ARPSC Net

WB8RCR

John McDonough

Michigan Traffic Net

WB8WKQ

Jeff Miller

Michigan VHF Traffic Net

AC8AR

Flora Jean Young

QMN, The Michigan Net

K8AE

Anne Travis

Southeast Michigan Traffic Net

WB8WKQ

Jeff Miller

Thumb and Mid-Michigan Traffic Net

K8VFZ

Grant Watson

Upper Peninsula Net

WA8DHB

Aileen Gagnon

Wolverine Single Sideband Net

K9RON

Ron Warczynski

TableÂ 3.Â Net Managers


To be eligible for affiliation, a net must report regularly and maintain
liaison with other National Traffic System nets. In addition, there are
perhaps 40 other nets operating within the state, approximately ten of
which report regularly. The STM has a small number of assistants who
engage in projects such as liaison with other entities, training, and
administrative duties:

Call

ASTM

KB8RCR

Ryan Lughermo

VE3EUI

Dennis Wilkinson

WD8USA

Joe Bell

TableÂ 4.Â Assistant Section Traffic Managers


4.Â Individual Amateur Reporting
--------------------------------

In addition to reporting by Emergency Coordinators and Net Managers,
individual amateurs are also encouraged to make reports. There are three
reports from individuals; Public Service Honor Roll, Station Activity
Report, and Brass Pounder's League.


4.1.Â Public Service Honor Roll

The Public Service Honor Roll reporting combines activity in a number of
categories. Stations get "points" for net checkins, traffic, Section
level appointments, public service oriented web or other digital systems,
and hours spent in public or emergency service. If a station reports 70
points within a month, that station is listed in QST, the amateur radio
journal. If a station is listed for 12 consecutive months, or for 18
months out of 24, the League will issue a certificate. PSHR reporting for
2010 has been relatively flat across the year. The summer months tend to
be higher due to bad weather and various public service events.
Public Service Honor Roll Reporting PSHR Results

FigureÂ 3.Â Public Service Honor Roll Reporting


4.2.Â Station Activity Reports

Stations handling traffic are encouraged to submit Station Activity
Reports (SAR) indicating the amount of traffic handled. Only 31 stations
reported during 2010. Since most of the traffic is handled by relatively
few stations, and those stations tend to be the stations that report, the
traffic totals reported are quite high. Stations handling a lot of
traffic tend to be those stations that act as liaisons to Region or Area
nets, so even though the number of stations reporting is quite small, the
amount of traffic reported is considerably larger than the totals from
net reports, which include only messages passed on Michigan nets. For
2010, Michigan stations individually reported 35,423 messages.
Station Activity Reports SAR Results

FigureÂ 4.Â Station Activity Reports


4.3.Â Brass Pounder's League

Stations reporting 500 messages passed in a single month, or a total of
100 originations plus deliveries are eligible for Brass Pounder's league.
This requires substantial dedication, and only a few stations achieve
this award. The stations qualifying in 2010 were:

Call

Name

Total

WB8WKQ

Jeff Miller

9010

WB9JSR

John Wehmer

8287

K8LJG

John Kroll

1285

K8CQF

Joe Turner

101

TableÂ 5.Â Brass Pounder's League


5.Â New Media
-------------

The section utilizes a number of electronic media to communicate with
members and potential members.


5.1.Â Electronic Mail

The Section Emergency Coordinator maintains an email list of all
Emergency Coordinators and District Emergency coordinators and uses this
as a primary means of direct communications with the ECs. The Section
Traffic Manager maintains a similar list of Net Managers.


5.2.Â Web

ARPSC maintains two web sites, one for ARES and one for NTS. There is
also a Section web site for more general information, and a web site
maintained by the Digiral Radio Group.

Site

URL

Content

Michigan Section

http://arrl-mi.org

Section news of general interest to amateurs in the Michigan Section

Amateur Radio Emergency Services

http://www.mi-arpsc.org

Reference information of interest to ARES members, as well as performance
data

National Traffic System

http://www.mi-nts.org

Reference information of interest to NTS members, as well as performance
data

Digital Radio Group

http://www.mi-drg.org

Reference information concerning various digital modes, especially
packet.

TableÂ 6.Â Web Sites


The screenshot below shows an example page from the mi-arpsc site.
mi-arpsc Website ARPSC website

FigureÂ 5.Â mi-arpsc Website


In addition to the Section sites, many Districts and Nets also maintain
web sites.


5.3.Â Blogs

The Section Emergency Coordinator also maintains a blog, however this
mode has proven to be of limited utility. Much of the information that
the SEC must communicate with ARPSC members has to do with the emergency
planning of the State of Michigan. This information should not be widely
distributed, and blogs are easily located by search engines. As a result,
blog entries have been relatively sparse.


5.4.Â Online Social Groups

The Section also maintains two Yahoo groups, the MIARPSC group is
available to all Michigan amateurs, and is often useful for a number of
discussions. The MIARPSC-DEC group is private to DECs and ADECs, and is
used for discussions within a smaller group. As with websites, many
Districts and nets have found it helpful to maintain their own groups,
most of these also on Yahoo.


5.5.Â Microblogging

The section maintains two microblogging accounts; miarpsc on identi.ca
and mi_arpsc on twitter.com. "Tweets" or "dents" are sent to these sites
periodically to remind followers of various upcoming events. Both sites
get exactly the same feed. There is also a page on the mi-arpsc web site,
http://www.mi-arpsc.org/arpsc_tweets.php where those who do not follow
either microblogging site may view the feed. ARPSC Twitter Feed Twitter
Feed

FigureÂ 6.Â ARPSC Twitter Feed


The section tries to keep the volume to a few tweets a week to prevent
followers from feeling that the feed is too burdensome. Many of the
tweets use the #hamr hash tag, causing those that follow amateur radio
tweets to also see the messages.


5.6.Â Online Meetings

Meetings within smaller groups are often held remotely. Simple phone
conferences are frequently used. In addition, GoTo Meeting, and more
recently, Vyew allow documents to be shared online during these phone
conferences.


5.7.Â Wiki

The section also maintains a wiki which is used by the ARPSC leadership
to develop certain plans and strategies. A wiki allows all participants
to contribute asynchronously to a "document", which in many cases can be
helpful. Example Wiki Page Wiki Page

FigureÂ 7.Â Example Wiki Page


The wiki is maintained on github which keeps a historical record and
allows easy rollback of changes if necessary.


6.Â Significant Incidents
-------------------------

In addition to numerous local incidents, in 2010 there were two incidents
that caused at least partial activation of the State EOC. In June, a
tornado went through Monroe county causing significant damage to the
Village of Dundee. In addition, the tornado damaged the E. Fermi II
nuclear power plant which caused activation of the SEOC. No release
occurred and the public was not endangered. ARES programs in Monroe and
Wayne counties responded. In July, a pipeline in Battle Creek operated by
Enbridge Inc. ruptured, spilling crude oil into the Kalamazoo River. ARES
programs from Calhoun, Allegan and Kalamazoo counties responded. In
neither case was the station at the State EOC activated, however in both
cases the SEC monitored the progress of the event via the State's
Critical Incident Management System and was in frequent telephone and
radio contact with the local programs.


7.Â Exercises
-------------

Local programs participate in numerous local and District-wide exercises
on a regular basis. There are also a number of statewide exercises in
which the Section participates.


7.1.Â State-sponsored exercises

The State of Michigan performs a number of drills and exercises each
year, most commonly concerned with nuclear power plants. During these
drills and exercises, the State EOC station is activated, the SEC or his
delegate participates in the EOC, and programs in the affected counties
are activated.

Date

Exercise

Counties

January 21

Palisades Drill #1

Van Buren, Allegan, Kalamazoo

February 17

Palisades Drill #2

Van Buren, Allegan, Kalamazoo

March 2

Palisades Full-scale Exercise

Van Buren, Allegan, Kalamazoo

May 12

E. Fermi II Drill #1

Monroe, Wayne

May 26

E. Fermi II Drill #2

Monroe, Wayne

June 8

E. Fermi II Full-scale Exercise

Monroe, Wayne

TableÂ 7.Â Michigan State Drills and Exercises


7.2.Â Section Exercises

The Section also organizes statewide exercises each year. Section
exercises, unlike State-sponsored exercises, tend to be functional,
exercising primarily communications skills, and are developed to attempt
to engage all the counties within the state. The interface between ARES
and NTS has not been as effective as it might be. Two functional drills
were held in 2010, both with the intention of helping to develop that
interface. The first was held April 10. In this exercise, detailed
instructions were provided to the leadership of ARES and NTS as to
expectations, circuits to be used, net schedules, etc. Although there
were some issues, the programs performed reasonably well. The second was
held October 2. The scenario and overall plan was the same as the April
drill, however, the Emergency Coordinators and Net Managers were given
much less detail. That exercise made it clear that much more practice is
needed in the NTS/ARES interface.


7.3.Â 2011 Exercise Plans

Emergency Coordinators have consistently asked for more statewide drills,
with the most common request being for four per year. There is a major
statewide exercise coming up in mid-year. This is being held in
conjunction with a National Level Exercise (NLE) around the New Madrid
fault called NM11. Because of the upcoming New Madrid exercise, we have
some additional needs, perhaps the most significant being embracing
FEMA's Homeland Security Exercise and Evaluation Program (HSEEP). For the
2011 cycle, our goals are as follows:

Timeframe

  *  2011

Present Problems

  *  Interface with State Agencies is weak or nonexistent

  *  Little knowledge of contacting other state EOCs

  *  Have not been effective in evaluating exercises

Long Range Goal

  *  Serve effectively as a partner to State Agencies as well as local
    agencies.

Functional Objectives

  *  Develop relationships with some State Agencies

  *  Develop multiple circuits to nearby state EOCs

  *  Learn to utilize HSEEP effectively

TableÂ 8.Â 2011 Objectives


This results in a fairly aggressive schedule for 2011. Note that a number
of the exercises are not statewide, but rather to exercise specific
skills within a limited group.

Ex11-x1 Feb 2011

  * Exercise: Functional Drill

  * For: Saginaw county, ARES leaders

  * Purpose: Exercise HSEEP

  * Rationale: The section has no experience with the FEMA process for
    developing and evaluating exercises. This is intended to pilot that
    process. Expect a simple drill but with most of the HSEEP
    deliverables.

Ex11-1 Feb 2011

  * Exercise: Functional Drill

  * For: Section wide

  * Purpose: Prepare for NM11

  * Rationale: Practice skills for NM11.

Ex11-x2 Mar 2011

  * Exercise: TTX

  * For: Michigan, Indiana NTSD

  * Purpose: Prepare for NM11

  * Rationale: Work out procedures for NM11. Validate relays from SEOC to
    WB9JSR to NTSD to Indiana key station to Indiana SEOC.

Ex11-x3 Mar 2011

  * Exercise: TTX

  * For: SEOC, MARS

  * Purpose: Prepare for NM11

  * Rationale: Work out procedures for NM11. Validate relays from SEOC to
    MARS to Indiana MARS rep to Indiana SEOC.

Ex11-x4 Apr 2011

  * Exercise: Functional Drill

  * For: Michigan, Indiana NTSD

  * Purpose: Prepare for NM11

  * Rationale: Test run procedures for moving messages over NTSD from the
    SEOC to the SEOC of Indiana in preparation for NM11.

Ex11-x5 Apr 2011

  * Exercise: Functional Drill

  * For: SEOC, MARS

  * Purpose: Prepare for NM11

  * Rationale: Test run procedures for moving messages over MARS digital
    from the SEOC to the SEOC of Indiana in preparation for NM11.

NM11 May 2011

  * Exercise: Full Scale Exercise

  * For: All State Agencies

  * Purpose: Test interface with other states

  * Rationale: Involve all agencies in an exercise that involves several
    other states.

Ex11-3 Aug 2011

  * Exercise: Functional Drill

  * For: Section wide

  * Purpose: tbd

  * Rationale: tbd

SET 2011 Oct 2011

  * Exercise: Functional Exercise

  * For: Section wide

  * Purpose: tbd

  * Rationale: tbd

TableÂ 9.Â Planned 2011 Exercises


8.Â Conferences
---------------

In 2010, the Section Emergency Coordinator attended two conferences
sponsored by the Michigan State Police. Several Emergency Coordinators
also attended these conferences. In May, the SEC attended the State
Homeland Security Conference in Grand Rapids. Topics covered included
terrorism, cyber security, use of social media, and interoperable
communications. In November, the SEC was privileged to speak at the State
Interoperable Communications Conference in Traverse City. This conference
was attended by a large number of Emergency Management Coordinators from
across the state as well as other first responders.


9.Â State Homeland Security Strategy
------------------------------------

In late 2009, the SEC participated with other State Agencies in the
development of the State Homeland Security Strategy. In 2010 that
strategy was approved, and a number of objective coordinators were
appointed to focus on the various elements of the strategy. Of particular
interest to ARPSC was Goal 2:

Â 

Enhance, implement, and sustain homeland security programs.

Â 

Â 

--Goal 2

and in particular

Â 

Annually identify planning needs to improve capabilities and address
changing conditions by August 30.

Â 

Â 

--Objective 2.1

The Section has committed to contribute to the State's progress against
this objective by preparing a number of planning documents. Some of these
documents have been completed, and a number are scheduled for 2011.

Date

Document

Description

Responsible

2011-01-31

State Simplex Plan

Agreement on use of simplex frequencies

SEC and DECs

2011-01-31

2011 Exercise Plan

How will we respond to 2011 exercises

ASEC Training and Exercises

2011-03-31

District callout plan

Plan for each district to mobilize ECs

Each individual DEC responsible for district

2011-04-30

County callout plan

Plan for each county to mobilize members

Each individual EC responsible for county

2011-05-30

MI ARPSC Guidelines

Guidelines for participants in MI-ARPSC. Signed by SM and MSP. Requires
revision and review

Bill Bond on point but heavy engagement of SM, SEC and DECs plus input
from MSP

2011-06-30

Net callout plan

Plan for each net to meet for unplanned session

Each individual net manager responsible for net

2011-08-31

2012 Plans

Objective 2.1 response plans for 2012

SEC

TableÂ 10.Â Targeted Documents for 2011


Because many of these documents contain sensitive information, the SEC
has developed a "library" on the website where these documents can be
easily found and, if necessary, password protected. DECs and Net Managers
have been given password access, and it is anticipated that most ECs will
also require access. Each program within the Section has a dedicated area
within the library. Library Opening Page Library Opening Page

FigureÂ 8.Â Library Opening Page


It is anticipated that documents within the library will be available in
a number of formats; html for online access, pdf for printed output, ePub
for portable devices, and plain text for packet BBSs and similar
low-bandwidth devices.


A.Â Revision History
--------------------

Revision History

Revision 1-0

Fri Jan 21 2011

John McDonough

Release - remove draft watermark

Revision 0-2

Thu Jan 20 2011

John McDonough

Changes suggested by N8ERF:

- Adjust colors on Figure 2

- Rewording of 7.3 to better explain HSEEP

Avoid splitting Table 3 Add table of Objective 2.1 documents Cosmetic
adjustments to most tables

Revision 0-1

Wed Jan 19 2011

John McDonough

Draft Content

Revision 0-0

Fri Jan 14 2011

John McDonough

Initial creation of book by publican
